[WIP] Remaining TSDS edits (#3222)
elastic/docs-content: manage-data/data-store/data-streams/time-series-data-stream-tsds.md

# Time series data streams [tsds]

A time series data stream (TSDS) is a type of [data stream](/manage-data/data-store/data-streams.md) optimized for indexing metrics data. A TSDS helps you analyze a sequence of data points as a whole.

A TSDS can also help you store metrics data more efficiently. In our benchmarks, metrics data stored in a TSDS used 70% less disk space than a regular data stream. The exact impact varies by data set.

Before setting up a time series data stream, make sure you're familiar with general [data stream](/manage-data/data-store/data-streams.md) concepts.

## When to use a time series data stream [when-to-use-tsds]

Both a regular data stream and a time series data stream can store timestamped metrics data. 

> Choose a time series data stream if you typically add metrics data to {{es}} in near real-time and in `@timestamp` order. For other timestamped data, such as logs or traces, use a [logs data stream](logs-data-stream.md) or [regular data stream](/manage-data/data-store/data-streams.md).

Reviewer: Consider expanding what metrics data means. Here, we're looking for a sequence of data point-timestamp pairs, identified by one or more dimension fields that can be used for slicing in aggregation queries.

Reviewer: This is nicely described in `Time-series concepts` below. Maybe add a cross reference, or have this section follow that one?

Author: reorder and rephrased

### Differences from a regular data stream [differences-from-regular-data-stream]

A time series data stream works like a regular data stream, with some key differences:

* **Time series index mode:** The matching index template for a TSDS must include a `data_stream` object with `index.mode` set to `time_series`. This option enables most TSDS-related functionality.
* **Required fields:** In a TSDS, each document contains:
  * A `@timestamp` field
  * One or more [dimension fields](#time-series-dimension), set with `time_series_dimension: true`  

>   * One or more [metric fields](#time-series-metric) (not strictly required, but typical for a TSDS)

Reviewer: Let's remove the `not strictly required` part. A time-series requires a metric field with non-null values.

* **Document IDs:** Time series documents use two IDs: 

>     * An internal [`_tsid`](#tsid) metadata field, generated by {{es}} for each document in a TSDS and used for sorting and compression

Reviewer: Still thinking whether we need to expose the `_tsid` so readily in our documentation.. If we do, we probably want to mention that it's calculated over all dimension values.

Another option is to have a section towards the end, shedding some light into how data gets structured internally.

Reviewer 2: +1, here I would mention that the id is calculated by es and cannot be provided, and if we want to elaborate more it should be in an implementation section. The reason is that I see it as an implementation detail and not as part of the API, if that makes sense.

>     * The document `_id`, a generated hash of the document's dimensions and `@timestamp` (custom `_id` values are not supported)

Reviewer: Maybe mention that it's auto-generated - passing a doc id during indexing results to an error.

* **Backing indices:** A TSDS uses [time-bound indices](/manage-data/data-store/data-streams/time-bound-tsds.md) to store data from the same time period in the same backing index.
* **Dimension-based routing:** The matching index template for a TSDS must contain the `index.routing_path` index setting, which specifies dimensions for routing documents to shards.
* **Sorting:** A TSDS uses internal [index sorting](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/index-settings/sorting.md) to order shard segments by `_tsid` and `@timestamp`, for better compression. Time series data streams do not use `index.sort.*` settings.

> * **Synthetic source:** A TSDS uses [synthetic `_source`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/mapping-source-field.md#synthetic-source), which has some [restrictions](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/mapping-source-field.md#synthetic-source-restrictions) and [modifications](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/mapping-source-field.md#synthetic-source-modifications).

Reviewer: One difference, though, is that it's not possible to [disable source](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/mapping-source-field#disable-source-field) for a TSDS. It's either standard or synthetic source mode.

## Query time series data

> You can use the {{esql}} [`TS` command](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/commands/ts.md) to query time series data streams. The `TS` command is optimized for time series data. It also enables the use of aggregation functions that efficiently process metrics per time series, before aggregating results.

Author: yes, thanks!

## Time series concepts [time-series]

A time series is a sequence of observations for a specific entity. Together, these observations let you track changes to the entity over time. For example, a time series can track:

- CPU and disk usage for a computer
- The price of a stock
- Temperature and humidity readings from a weather sensor

:::{image} /manage-data/images/elasticsearch-reference-time-series-chart2.svg
:alt: time series chart
:title: Time series of weather sensor readings plotted as a graph
:::

> In a TSDS, each {{es}} document represents an observation, or data point, in a specific time series. Although a TSDS can contain multiple time series, a document can belong to only one time series. A single time series can't span multiple data streams.

Reviewer: That's not 100% correct. The proper definition of a time series includes the metric name. Since we can have multiple metric fields populated in a single doc, these map to multiple time series. @felixbarny too for thoughts here.

Author: This was legacy content so I went ahead and deleted it

### Time series fields

> Compared to a regular data stream, a TSDS uses some additional fields specific to time series:  dimension fields (required) and metric fields (optional but usually defined), plus an internal `_tsid` metadata field.

Reviewer: Ditto, let's not call metric fields optional.

* [`unsigned_long`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/number.md)
* [`boolean`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/boolean.md)

To work with a flattened field, use the `time_series_dimensions` parameter to configure an array of fields as dimensions. For details, refer to [`flattened`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/flattened.md#flattened-params).

You can also simplify dimension definitions by using [pass-through](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/passthrough.md#passthrough-dimensions) fields.

#### Metrics [time-series-metric]

Metrics are numeric measurements that change over time. Documents in a TSDS typically contain one or more metric fields. 

:::{tip}
Metrics are expected to change (even if rarely or slowly), while dimensions generally remain constant.

> :::

Reviewer: You can probably remove this note. Dimension values may also change, e.g. as nodes join and leave a cloud deployment.

To mark a field as a metric, use the `time_series_metric` mapping parameter. This parameter ensures data is stored in an optimal way for time series analysis. The following field types support the `time_series_metric` parameter:

* All [numeric field types](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/number.md)
* [`aggregate_metric_double`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/aggregate-metric-double.md), for internal use during downsampling (rarely user-populated)

The valid values for `time_series_metric` are `counter` and `gauge`:

`counter`
:   A cumulative metric that only monotonically increases or resets to `0` (zero). For example, a count of errors or completed tasks that resets when a serving process restarts. 

`gauge`
:   A metric that represents a single numeric that can arbitrarily increase or decrease. For example, a temperature or available disk space. 

#### `_tsid` metadata field [tsid]

> The `_tsid` is an automatically generated object containing the document’s dimensions. It's intended for internal {{es}} use, so in most cases you won't need to work with it. The format of the `_tsid` field is subject to change. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `_tsid` is an automatically generated object derived from the document’s dimensions. It's intended for internal {{es}} use, so in most cases you won't need to work with it. The format of the `_tsid` field is subject to change. 
```

Reviewer: "containing" is not accurate (it used to contain parts of the dimension values but not any more).. it's calculated using all dimension values per doc.

* **Time series index mode:** The matching index template for a TSDS must include a `data_stream` object with `index.mode` set to `time_series`. This option enables most TSDS-related functionality.
* **Fields:** In a TSDS, each document contains:
  * A `@timestamp` field
  * One or more [dimension fields](#time-series-dimension), set with `time_series_dimension: true`  
  * One or more [metric fields](#time-series-metric)
  * An auto-generated document `_id` (custom `_id` values are not supported)
* **Backing indices:** A TSDS uses [time-bound indices](/manage-data/data-store/data-streams/time-bound-tsds.md) to store data from the same time period in the same backing index.
* **Dimension-based routing:** The routing logic uses dimension fields to map data to shards, improving storage efficiency and query performance.
* **Sorting:** A TSDS uses internal [index sorting](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/index-settings/sorting.md) to order shard segments by `_tsid` and `@timestamp`, for better compression. Time series data streams do not use `index.sort.*` settings.

## Query time series data
```{applies_to}
stack: preview
serverless: preview
```

> You can use the {{esql}} [`TS` command](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/commands/ts.md) (in technical preview) to query time series data streams. The `TS` command is optimized for time series data. It also enables the use of aggregation functions that efficiently process metrics per time series, before aggregating results.

Reviewer 3: Maybe remove the (in technical preview). The TS docs also contain that and it's another thing we need to remember to keep in sync when TS goes beta or GA.

* [`unsigned_long`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/number.md)
* [`boolean`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/boolean.md)

:::{dropdown} Advanced field types
To work with a flattened field, use the `time_series_dimensions` parameter to configure an array of fields as dimensions. For details, refer to [`flattened`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/flattened.md#flattened-params).

You can also simplify dimension definitions by using [pass-through](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/passthrough.md#passthrough-dimensions) fields.
:::

#### Metrics [time-series-metric]

> Metrics are numeric measurements that change over time. Although metrics are not required, documents in a TSDS typically contain one or more metric fields. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics are numeric measurements that change over time. Documents in a TSDS typically contain one or more metric fields. 
```

:::{tip}
Metrics are expected to change (even if rarely or slowly), while dimensions generally remain constant.
:::

To mark a field as a metric, use the `time_series_metric` mapping parameter. This parameter ensures data is stored in an optimal way for time series analysis. The following field types support the `time_series_metric` parameter:

> * [`aggregate_metric_double`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/aggregate-metric-double.md)

Reviewer: Nit: move this second, it's very rare that users populate it. It gets internally generated during downsampling, mostly.

* All [numeric field types](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/number.md)

The valid values for `time_series_metric` are `counter` and `gauge`:

`counter`
:   A cumulative metric that only monotonically increases or resets to `0` (zero). For example, a count of errors or completed tasks. 

`gauge`
:   A metric that represents a single numeric that can arbitrarily increase or decrease. For example, a temperature or available disk space. 

:::::

#### `_tsid` metadata field [tsid]

The `_tsid` is an automatically generated object containing the document’s dimensions. It's intended for internal {{es}} use, so in most cases you won't need to work with it.

> - You **can't** query or update the internal `_tsid` field.

Reviewer: I'd skip these 3 points and just keep the last one, to highlight why it should not be used in queries.
